---
layout: post
category : lessons
tagline: "Higher-order Regular Expressions"
tags : [intro, beginner, tutorial]
---
#### So, what is a higher-order Regex?
It is safe to say that one of the most well-known declarative languages is Regex.  
"Higher-order" speaks to the complexity of the data and of the expression.  

##### Terminology from classic Regex
The classic Regex is a great way to find subsequences of characters that match what you're looking for.
Their use is simple (if seldom easy): you declare what you're looking for in a sequence of characters (string).

* `a` represents the `a` __class__ (literally the character `a`, and `A` if ignoring case)
* `abc` represents a __list of expressions__ (classes `a`, `b`, & `c`) that matches the literal characters `a` followed by `b` followed by `c` in `abcdefghijkl...`
* `gr[ea]y` matches either spelling - `grey` or `gray`. In this example, `[ea]` represents a custom __class__ that matches if either the `e` or the `a` class matches.
* `a+` represents a __repetition expression__ of the `a` class, matching if `a` one or more times consecutively, for example it would match `a`, `aa`, `aaa`
* `\d` represents the digit __class__.  It matches a single digit character.
* `\d{3}-\d{4}` matches something like a phone number `555-1234`.  The `{3}` represents repeating the previous expression 3 times.  `[ab]{2,3}` would match 2 to 3 'a's or 'b's like `aa` and `baa`, but not `a` or `baaa`.


##### Data for a Higher-order Regex
Fundamentally, classic regexes work on sequences of characters - strings.  There are few things as primitive as a `char`.  A string or a token is a _higher_ abstraction than `char`.  An arbitrary datapoint class is higher-order than a `char`.  With HighRegex, you can define regexes that operate on sequences of any type.

Consider a sequence of automobile steering data points collected every 1/10th second.

    t=0   Left(-.1)
    t=1   Left(-.2)
    t=2   Straight(-.01)
    t=3   Straight(.01)
    t=4   Straight(.05)
    t=5   Right(.14)
    t=6   Right(.1)
    t=7   Right(.1)
    t=8   Straight(-.03)
    t=9   Straight(-.06)

Maybe we want to find right turns followed by long straight-aways on a track.

##### Expressions for a Higher-order Regex
In Functional Programming, "Higher Order Functions" are functions that take other functions as a parameter and/or return functions.  Similarly, higher order regular expressions are composed of other regular expressions.

Consider this example where the "right turns followed by long straight-away" is _composed_ from simpler expressions.

    var straight = new DirectionClass("Straight");
    var right = new DirectionClass("Right");
    var straightAway = new RepeatExpression<WheelDataPoint>(straight, minRepetitions:3, maxRepetitions:100);
    var rightThenStraightAway = new ListExpression<WheelDataPoint>(right, straightAway);

    // or in a single statement:
    var rightThenStraightAway = 
    	new ListExpression<WheelDataPoint>(
    		new DirectionClass("Right"),
    		new RepeatExpression<WheelDataPoint>(new DirectionClass("Straight"), minRepetitions:3, maxRepetitions:100));

You have no doubt noticed that the above C# looks nothing like regex syntax.  The example below is a markup language for declaring expressions.  Each line is a declaration in the form of
`{Type} {name}={arguments}`

    DirectionClass straight=Straight
    DirectionClass right=Right
    RepeatExpression straightAway=straight 3, 100
    ListExpression rightThenStraightAway=right straightAway

The example above isn't much better, but this next example is shows how the declarations and regex-like syntax mix.  At the end, `right straight{3,100}` does look familiar.  It defines breaks our solution into managable parts and composes them at the end.  It is logically equivalant to the above examples.

    DirectionClass straight=Straight
    DirectionClass right=Right
    ParsedExpression rightThenStraightAway=right straight{3,100}

### In Closing

We have barely scratched the surface, but I hope you can see the potential to break solutions into managable, composable pieces.

Next time, we'll compare ideas from System.Text.RegularExpressions to HighRegex.
